---
layout: post
title: The Biodiversity Crisis Marks the Start of the Sixth Mass Extinction
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [science]
---

_444 million years ago. 375 million years ago. 251 million years ago. 200 million years ago. 66 million years ago. The Big Five Mass Extinctions rocked Earth’s geologic history. Now, this generation carries in the sixth one._

Over the last few centuries, our knowledge of geologic time has vastly increased. From the primitive belief that all species on Earth had originated that way, to Cuvier’s discovery of extinct species, to Darwin’s Theory of Evolution, humans have gleaned a rough understanding of the history of our world. But little did scientists beginning to study mass extinctions in the 20th century know that they were witnessing the roots of one themselves.  

**The Geologic Time Scale**  
To understand exactly how devastating these mass extinctions were for life on Earth, one must first have a basic understanding of the geologic time scale and the causes of the five extinctions that threw a wrench into the evolution and adaptation of life on our planet. Scientists have outlined this timescale into eons, further divided into eras, which are divided into periods. There are smaller classifications, including epochs and ages, but those won’t be covered in this brief summary of time.  
The first three eons, the Hadean, the Archean, and the Proterozoic are collectively known as the Pre-Cambrian Era (here, the era is larger than the eons, however moving forward eras will be subdivisions of eons). The Pre-Cambrian ranges from the beginning of Earth’s history to the start of primitive life on Earth.  
We start with the Hadean Eon, which ranged from approximately 4600 to 4000 mya. This eon’s name originates from Hades, a Greek word for (and the Greek god of) the underworld. In this eon, Earth was a violent planet. Its surface was marred with volcanoes and frequented by collisions from other astronomical bodies. This eon is also when Earth slowly gained stability in orbit and as well as the classification as a planet.  
The next stage is the Archean Eon (4000 to 2500 mya). This began with the formation and solidification of Earth’s crust. Scientists have found fossilized evidence of the first life forms beginning to develop in this eon. These first life forms – small microbes, including archaebacteria – would slowly evolve and mutate, creating the highly diverse tree of life found on Earth today.  
Moving forwards, we find ourselves in the Proterozoic Eon (between 2500 and 541 mya). Life was steadily growing in this time period, slowly adapting to become oxygen-dependent as the amount of oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere began to increase. The life mostly consisted of producers, one of the most recognizable being forms of algae, which produced oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis. This kept the oxygen levels in Earth’s atmosphere relatively high.  
Exiting the Pre-Cambrian Era, we enter a whole new timescale. Geologists have mapped out the rest of Earth’s history into the Phanerozoic Eon. Subdivisions of this eon are classified as part of the Phanerozoic Time Scale.  
There are three eras in the Phanerozoic Time Scale: the Paleozoic, the Mesozoic, and the Cenozoic. As one can expect, life developed relatively quickly, starting from echinoderms, corals, and trilobites in the Paleozoic to the reign of the dinosaurs in the Mesozoic and finally, the story of our species – and the life on Earth as we know it today – in the Cenozoic.   
To provide a quick overview of time in the Phanerozoic Time Scale, we must first start in the Paleozoic Era (541 to 254 mya). This era marks the end of the Pre-Cambrian and the start of a new revolution for Earth and all existing life on it. The Paleozoic Era starts with the Cambrian Period, which transitions into the Ordovician, then Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous, and finally Permian. The details of how life developed throughout the Paleozoic are unnecessary, however at the end, trilobites were living in harmony with echinoderms and other lower life forms.   
The next era is the Mesozoic (from 254 to 66 mya). This one is divided into only three periods, and these three are some of the most well-known from the Geologic Time Scale. They are the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous Periods. Most people know these as when the dinosaurs reigned, but other species developed during this time as well, including fish, modern plants, invertebrates, and pterosaurs.  
The final era is the Cenozoic, which ranges from 66 million years ago and is still ongoing. It is divided into just two periods – the Tertiary and the Quaternary. The Tertiary Period oversaw the development of many mammals, including bears, dogs, cats, monkeys, and more. The Quaternary Period shows the development of life from mammoths and mastodons to modern day animals, as well as the evolution of the human race throughout. The Quaternary Period is also the current period on the Geologic Time Scale.  

**The Mass Extinctions**  
In this timespan, five major mass extinctions occurred, each wiping out over 75% of all species on Earth. The first one occurred in the end Ordovician Period (which, as a reminder, was in the early Paleozoic Era, around 440 million years ago). Scientists believe that due to the uplift of the Appalachians in this time, a short yet devastating ice age occurred. This killed approximately 86% of all species on Earth (majorly the graptolites, which were filter-feeding sea creatures).   
The second mass extinction occurred a little under 100 million years later, in the late Devonian Period (around the middle of the Paleozoic Era, 365 million years ago). 75% of all life on Earth was killed in this event. The most common theory states that newly evolved plants released nutrients into the water, which triggered a chain reaction cumulating in the death of one of the most famous species from this time (as well as others that lived in this period): the trilobites.  
The third one occurred again around 100 million years later, this time in the end Permian Period (the last period in the Paleozoic Era, 250 million years ago). It was devastating, with around 96% of life vanishing. Such magnitude gave this extinction the nickname “The Great Dying”. A series of cataclysmic events including eruptions, a heavy release of methane gas, and the rapid acidification of oceans dramatically changed Earth’s climate, and organisms couldn’t adapt fast enough.   
The fourth one occurred in the end Triassic period (in a new era, the Mesozoic Era, 210 million years ago), approximately 200 million years ago. Scientists are still puzzled by this extinction, as they cannot find a cause for it. However, at this point, 80% of all species were lost, including various types of invertebrates that had developed over the millennia. This extinction was what allowed the sudden rise of the dinosaurs.  
The last one, of all the extinctions, is the most widely known. It occurred at the end of the Cretaceous Period (the last period in the Mesozoic Era, 65 million years ago), approximately 66 million years ago. It is known as the Cretaceous-Paleogene Extinction, in which 76% of all species were lost, the most famous being the several species of dinosaurs that reigned over the world. In addition, lesser life forms quickly died out, including ammonites and other shelled invertebrates. As is widely told in both scholarly articles and children’s books, the extinction was caused by the collision of an asteroid and Earth’s crust near the Yucatan Peninsula. This asteroid released so much dust upon impact that Earth’s climate dramatically changed, thus killing all the species that couldn’t handle said change.  

**The Anthropocene Extinction**  
_Anthropocene: The period during which human activity has been the dominant influence on climate and the environment_  
The Anthropocene Extinction is believed to be happening underfoot. It is named such because this rapid dying of species is believed to be a result of human activity.  
There has been news of several species dying lately, but surely, species must die out naturally. The question then becomes, what is a mass extinction? How do scientists decide whether an event is a mass extinction, or whether it is death due to natural selection?  
Species do die out naturally, in what is known as the background extinction rate. This changes per species, as some species are better built for survival than others. For mammals, it is predicted that one species will go extinct every 200 years.  
However, the high rates of extinction seen in the past few years are way above that of the background extinction rate of any species – and this is what consists of a mass extinction, a time when species rapidly disappear.  
Over the past 400 years, we have encountered at least 89 extinct mammalian species (and possibly over 100), which is far greater than the background extinction rate described in the previous paragraphs. And this is true not just for mammals, but for reptiles, and for birds, and other types of animals as well.  
So far, this loss of life has been titled The Biodiversity Crisis.  
The rapid decline of Earth’s biodiversity is definetly alarming. What’s even more alarming is that it is mostly human-caused. When the crisis was first discovered in the late 1900s, scientists didn’t think too deeply about it. Species were dying, and it definetly was bad enough to be given the title of a crisis, but they certainly didn’t think that we could be in the middle of another mass extinction.  
The truth is, we are.  
Survival is a harsh competition, but lately the lines have been drawn between humans and the rest of life on Earth. Deforestation and climate change are just a few of the factors that contribute to the heavy decline in species all over the world. Many people care enough about the environment that they follow norms of conserving electricity or recycling, but they rarely realize the true weight this carries.  
Humans taking control over nature for so many years has taken its toll. It not only will slowly morph our planet, it will slowly morph our species – and all the other species – as well, as we struggle to adapt to a whole new world.  
While conservation may not help as we move into the newest mass extinction, we should still keep helping other species as well. After all, if we can save even one species from extinction, that is one more species that will survive a catastrophe.  
And to those who don’t believe in the Anthropocene Extinction, to those who think it is a crisis but we can’t possibly be witnessing an event that has occurred only five times in all of Earth’s history, look at the numbers.  
If this extinction first officially began in the 1900s, then we’ve seen over 500 known extinct species in just over a hundred years. Even more of these species are in rapid decline – according to the IUCN Red List, 41% of amphibians, 25% of mammals, 13% of birds, 33% of reef-building corals, 63% of cycads, and 34% of conifers are being pushed to extinction.   
In addition, scientists predict that the current extinction rate is around 1000 to 10000 times greater than usual, which is even greater than that during some mass extinctions.  
If there are 8.7 million species on Earth, and we use a generic extinction rate of 2 extinctions per 10000 species per 100 years, then we get the number of extinct species in the next century to be a little over 1500 – that is, around 0.02% of all species are expected to naturally go extinct soon.  
However, the IUCN has assessed 47677 species and out of that, 17291 were threatened with extinction. Using this sample, approximately 36.27% of the species may go extinct in the century (and this doesn’t include the countless species that have gone extinct already). While this may not seem like a lot compared to the extinction rates of other mass extinctions, this is only over the span of a few centuries, while mass extinctions typically last between 15 and 30 million years.  
These numbers line up with the extinction rates of previous events (and are, in fact, much higher than those of previous extinction events), allowing the Anthropocene to take its place amongst the now six major mass extinction events in Earth’s history.

