---
layout: post
title: AlphaGo
subtitle: How An AI Became the World's Strongest Go Player
cover-img: /assets/img/christopher-burns-Kj2SaNHG-hg-unsplash.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/christopher-burns-Kj2SaNHG-hg-unsplash.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/christopher-burns-Kj2SaNHG-hg-unsplash.jpg
tags: [science, philosophy]
---

Photo by [Christopher Burns](https://unsplash.com/@christopher__burns?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/artificial-intelligence?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText).

A few weeks ago, I watched the award-winning documentary [AlphaGo – The Movie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WXuK6gekU1Y&ab_channel=DeepMind). It was incredibly well done, retelling the story behind the artificial intelligence that demonstrated the true power of technology.

AlphaGo was first developed by DeepMind Technologies in 2014. Previous AIs had been trained to play strategy games (namely IBM’s Deep Blue, which defeated chess world champion Garry Kasparov in 1997), but none for the game of Go. Go was particularly complicated for a machine to play well due to the innumerable placements of stones on the board: the documentary even stated that there are “more board configurations than there are atoms in the universe”. As a result, Go players rely heavily on human intuition.

AlphaGo was initially trained on a dataset consisting of historical Go games in an attempt to mimic human play style. When it was first distributed in 2015, DeepMind invited European champion Fan Hui to play.

And AlphaGo won. 5-0.

AlphaGo’s victory, to me, was not surprising. Having seen the increasing power of artificial intelligence, and how it is slowly coming to dominate parts of society, I understood its potential.

What I was not expecting were the numbers. Out of the five games played, AlphaGo won them all.

However, AlphaGo’s journey wouldn’t end there. The documentary continues on to AlphaGo’s match against 9-dan Go champion Lee Sedol. This series of five matches would be the moment of truth: could an artificial intelligence truly beat a human professional?

AlphaGo won the first game. And the second. And the third.

Lee Sedol was fighting a battle of human intelligence versus artificial intelligence. And artificial intelligence was winning.

What struck me the most about AlphaGo’s gameplay was its tendency to make unexpected decisions. AlphaGo would make moves that even it thought were improbable, given the situation. And yet, it would win.

Why? Because AlphaGo was shifting away from just emulating the games it had learned on, and was instead forming its own style. It was an interesting thought, one that brought to light the power of AI. AlphaGo was almost creative. Almost … *human*.

Then came game four, which changed everything. When Lee Sedol played move 78, he turned the tide in his favor. And, when AlphaGo finally resigned, he brought home a victory for the human race.

This was an emotional moment. Despite the overwhelming power of artificial intelligence, Lee was able to win. He proved that we, as a human race, can still put up a fight. We can still win.

What’s more is that AlphaGo learned over a dataset consisting of around 30 million moves. Lee Sedol was able to match AlphaGo after only three games.

Going into watching the documentary, I had expected it to be very technical. Instead, I found that it was far more philosophical.

As with everyone else, I was rooting for Lee Sedol. After he said he was fighting for humanity, the world was on his side. And when he won, the world celebrated his triumph.

And that’s when I began to question, as a human race, how do we define our own strength? Is it defined as being stronger than what we create? Or is it being able to create something stronger than us?

I think AlphaGo’s matches with Lee Sedol proved that it’s a little bit of both.

We may feel powerful when we create a machine that defeats a human. But we feel emotional when a human defeats a machine we created.

We might feel helpless against the growing power of AI. We might feel impressed by it. Stunned. Cynical. Eager for more. Inspired. Lost.

But if there’s one thing that we have that AI still doesn’t, it’s humanity. Emotion. Appreciation.

Lee Sedol said it best: “robots will never understand the beauty of the game the way humans do”.
