---
layout: post
title: New Car
cover-img: /assets/img/erik-mclean-3WAMh1omVAY-unsplash.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/erik-mclean-3WAMh1omVAY-unsplash.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/erik-mclean-3WAMh1omVAY-unsplash.jpg
tags: [philosophy, personal]
---

<sub>Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@introspectivedsgn?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Erik Mclean</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/a-row-of-cars-parked-in-a-parking-lot-3WAMh1omVAY?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a></sub>

“Congratulations!” the saleswoman at the car dealership exclaims to us, her smile bright as day as she shakes my hand, standing beside the gleaming red car my family just bought. I merely nod in response, my eyes on our old silver car in the parking lot. It gleams under the streetlamps, parked not far from where we’re standing. The cool night gives the atmosphere a sense of nostalgia, and it was in a dreamlike state that I entered the backseat of the red Subaru and let my father drive me home, leaving our old car behind.

This story began fifteen years ago, when a silver Toyota Rav4 with a midnight finish, gray cloth seats and a clunky spare tire positioned off-center on the back of the car, was made in 2008, and bought by my family, used, in 2009. I can hardly remember my life before this car, which had always been omnipresent in everything I did.

As a child, I would hide a journal underneath the seat covers and extract it every time we would go on long drives. As I watched the world pass by around me, and observed the change in scenery as I traveled across the country, I would pencil my observations. Snippets of my thoughts intermingled with qualitative notes, which would become a travel journal that I’d preserve to this date.

Family road trips, letting the radio play songs or inserting CDs into the old-fashioned console, are some of my fondest memories: I would read books in the backseat until I felt carsick; I would sing along off-key to my favorite songs, not realizing that all my lyrics were wrong; I would press my face to the window and watch as we sped along across state lines and city skylines. 

At fifteen, I learned to drive in this car. I remember clear as day clutching the wheel in fear as I circled around a parking lot at barely five miles an hour, afraid to turn the wheel too much, then a year later, driving to the DOL to receive my license.

Even more than memories, though, is the fact that this car is so familiar. It’s slightly clunky and old and it doesn’t have any modern safety features, but when you grow up around something, it’s hard to let it go. When you let something become a constant in your life, when the fact sets in that I’ve known this car just as long as I’ve consciously known myself, then it becomes all the more harder to move on.

The story of this car is the epitome of my ideology: I hated letting things go. Even when I was driving and I cursed the car for not having automatic lane assist, I still wouldn’t have ever given it up. I didn’t want to let this car go.

Well, eventually it did go.

It would take time to get used to it. Although the seats were comfortable and the driving was smooth, it still had a distinctive air of a new car; even when the literal smell itself faded, there was still the impersonality.

I never liked change, but as I sat in the driver’s seat and felt the grip of the wheel under my fingers, I realized that sometimes it isn’t a bad thing. When I turned to myself in moments like these, some part of me changed as well: the part of me that feared leaving the past behind was now embracing the present, challenging my initial fear of the new.

Every now and then, I still feel a shock of surprise when I see a red car backing into our driveway rather than the silver one I’m used to. Every now and then, I still feel slightly out-of-place climbing a twenty day old car. But I’ve come to realize that the memories weren’t lost. They still remained in my head, a loving collection of fifteen years worth of joy. 

Now, we’re just given the opportunity to make new ones. 

And that, I realized, is the essence of change.
